When you need to focus
on building, do you want
to get bogged down by
your database? Mongo DB is
an intuitive, flexible document database
that lets you get to
building Mongo. DBS document model
is a natural way to
represent data so you can
focus on what matters. Mongo
DB Atlas is the best
way to use Mongo DB.
It's a global cloud database
service that gives you all
of the developer productivity of
Mongo DB. Plus the added
simplicity of a fully managed
database service you can get
started free with Mongo DB
atlas@mongodb.com slash Atlas. Hi, this
is Scott Hanselman. This is
Hansel minutes today. I'm talking
with Kevi McMahon. She's a
software engineer. She's worked on
product and technical challenges for
a number of years and
she's led significant engineering projects
at get hub, including kid
hub apps. How are you?
I'm good, Scott. Thanks for
having me on. Yeah, I
found your blog at
dot com K E a
V Y. And you've got
a number of really great
blog posts. They all kind
of have a theme. You
talk about building bridges as
a technical leader. And one
of my favorites is called
thriving on the technical leadership
path. Since we're not really
early in career people, I
don't think it's appropriate anymore
to say junior or senior
there's early in career. There's
maybe later in career or
more senior, I assume that
you were maybe a CTO
or you were the chief
engineer, but you are, you
don't have an org that
works for you, right? You
don't have a team of
10 engineers, do you? Oh
wow. No, I wish I
know. I just an IC,
I don't, I don't have
a team. I work with
a bunch of teams 20
years into a career. They
keep kind of poke you
and say, well, Hey, here's
a team here. And suddenly
the next thing you know,
you're a manager and you're
just like, and then you
always hear the person that
says, well, I used to
be technical. How did you
keep that from happening? Yeah.
I had a short stint
as being an engineering manager
a few years ago and
I was sort of reluctantly
tried it out and I
was already a tech lead
for a project that I
really cared a lot about
it. And I think it
was partly if you don't
become a manager, it sort
of threatened the people on
that team or threaten the
project. So I kind of
semi reluctantly did it just
to see if the project
and then realized I just,
I just did not like
being a manager, you know,
I don't really want to
know about people's salaries and,
and have that kind of
responsibility. So in the end
I said like, I actually
really don't want to do
this anymore. And luckily the
company was okay with, I
guess, realizing that I could
just carry on. As I
had been before I was
called a manager and I
was still effectively running a
team and running a project.
So a lot of things
didn't change, but I was
definitely happier. Was That hard
though? I mean, do you
mean like when I was
given a team, I have
felt like, Oh gosh, like,
are they going to think?
I don't like people, if
I say, I don't want
to be a manager, like,
is it gonna affect my
career? I wonder how many
people go into management because
they love it versus they
just have been around so
long. Now you should be
a manager. Oh, definitely. I
think there's huge pressure to
once you've been at an
ICU for a certain amount
of years, I think there's
huge pressure to be a
manager it's sort of Theo
ne maybe obvious career progression
choice for a lot of
folk, which is a real
shame. What does that mean
like that? No one's ever
dug into that. You're Oh,
it's like you show up
to a company for five
years or 10 years. Someone
looks at you and says,
Oh, it's you, you're still
here. Hey, QB should be
a manager. Like why? Because
you're here still. And I
think some companies go like
the pendulum swings a little
bit. Like, I mean, my
stint as an it manager
was at GitHub. And when,
once upon a time it
get on play, there were
famously no managers at all.
And I mean, it was
actually kind of grid for
a while. I mean, there
were definite definite downsides, but
like, you know, a lot
of things shipped and you
know, people were very self-driven
self motivated. Cause I guess
you had to be. So
I don't know if some
companies, I think that have
swung really far in the
other direction of like manager
is the be all and
end all of everything and
there's, that's increased the, the
pressure to like, this is
the direction your career should
go. And certainly like there's
a lot of promotion, you
know, there's, there's a lot
of promotion possibilities for people
in the, in that path
and much less. So on
the IC In your blog
posts, you call that out.
Like you were a manager
for 73 days, you counted,
it sounds like, but you
decided it wasn't for you
and your fortunately the company
didn't judge you or give
you a hard time for
saying, I don't want to
be a manager. And you
decided that, you know, there
should be a path for
technical leaders who are individual
contributors, but does that mean
that you are you the
person who is trying to
go along this path is
like the smartest at your,
not necessarily your senior, your
later in career, but you're
not saying that you're the
most technical person on the
team. You're just someone who's
got it. Definitely not. Like
I am probably never the
smartest person in the room,
so to speak. I think
what it is more about
and what I'm better at
is just moving things forward
and getting the right people
together in the room and
figuring out what's missing and
how can we, how can
we solve those problems and
just continually moving things forward
more than, yeah, I think
it's more by persistence and
maybe stubbornness than pure technical
knowledge. And obviously like you,
you know, you have to
have a certain amount of
the technical skills to back
that up, but yeah, it's
more, more broad, You know,
I really appreciate that word
persistence. And I, I think
about the, kind of, some
of the younger and earlier
in career people that I,
that I mentor and it's
hard to teach them that,
but honestly just you can't
solve every problem in 45
minutes of Googling. You just
need to sit down and
do it. And like, when
I think about it as
well, like the projects that
I've seen her for the
years feel like it's never
been because those engineers weren't
smart enough quite the country,
maybe sometimes, but when people
are too honed in on
a technical solution, the chances
of that, you know, especially
in a bigger organization or,
you know, the chances of
the technical knowledge being enough
to see something through DSPs
successful Shep is just so
slammed. I think that, yeah,
it really does take persistence
and figure. And I had
all the other parts of
the jigsaw puzzle to get
something successfully shipped something. Yeah.
I think that we sometimes
mythologized the more elder engineer
and we just assume that
like, well, they're, they've been
here 20 years. They must
know everything. One day I'll
be that smart, but it's
really that they're good at
coordinating. They're good at communicating.
And they also sometimes know
what other orgs are working
on so that you might
propose a technical solution and
you go, well, you know,
actually strategically in a year,
that's not the direction we
want to go, but a
line engineer wouldn't know that.
Absolutely. Yeah. And like being
in touch with like, what
does the business really need?
And what's it still going
to need in a year's
time or two year's time
or keeping in touch with
that is probably pretty critically
important. And then I think
that I find has really
worked for me is also
knowing what I'm not good
at and finding the people
to work with that balance.
My skillset, like one big
project I worked on at
get hub. Like I specifically,
like I formed a team
to work on this, on
this big project and recruited
people that would valance my
skill sets. So like were,
I guess there are things
that also don't stress me
out like timed deadlines and
doing all the coordination between
different groups, but there are
other engineers that hit that
side of things, but maybe
are like super good at
getting into the nitty gritty
of the code or refactor
in something. And it's a
team and that was kind
of skills together has really
worked well. For me, It
seems like though, at a
certain age, as you move
through the kind of the
bell curve of your career,
it's hard to say that
you don't know something and
that you want to balance
it out. Like that's a
very mature thing to say.
I think a lot of
early in career people think
that they will eventually become
a Swiss army knife and
know everything, but acknowledging like,
you know, I'm just not
a, I don't know, low
level dumped the bugger type
and that's just not my
thing. And I'm not going
to apologize for it not
being my thing. Yeah. I
guess I've definitely noticed as
I've got or more experienced
that I, I'm more comfortable
saying that. And maybe it's
a mixture of like being
comfortable in what you do
know, but I've become very
comfortable of saying in a
group like, Oh, I like,
what does that word mean?
That you're, that you're saying
like, what what's that acronym?
Or like, You know, I,
I do I do I
do it now because sometimes
I'm suspicious in meetings where
they'll say an acronym and
I'm thinking that maybe they
did it just to make
us all feel dumb and
I'll just stare them down.
Like, I don't know what
that acronym is, what does
that mean? And also all
the young people and all
the early career people don't
know. So then I'm like,
I'm not going to let
them all just sit there
and hang in and go
later and Google what that
is. Oh, tell me what
that acronym is. Totally. And
I think like it's a
really good example to set
for earlier career folk for
the, in my current job
at Fastly I'm in this
little group, the office of
the CTO where there's a
lot of like properly smart
engineers that work on stuff
that is kind of like
completely different to, to my,
to my work, you know,
that are working like on
the packets, you know, something
really newer level that I'm
used to, but what's been
fascinating working with those folk
is that they're not patronized
in or like they'll be
just as fascinated. And what
I'm working on with maybe
the API is that I
don't know, just completely different
ends of the spectrum. And
that I think the more
mature engineers get like the
lower ego and people are
comfortable saying they don't know
and, and enjoy and just
let you know, learn. And
for people that do have
a specialism in a particular
area, Well, you know, when
you have a good design
and the API APIs are
clear and you have a
nice, a series of layers,
right? And you say that's
a lovely design that this
layer calls that layer and
each layer knows what it's
good at doing. You know,
we always talk about single
responsibility principle, but we don't
usually think about that in
the context of people because
everyone's expected to know everything,
but it is nice to
have a team where it's
like, alright, I know the
packets on the, you know,
and I'll talk to TCP
IP and I'm cool with
that. And here's the interface
that I'll be interfacing with
you on. And when it's
nice and clear and crisp,
it does work out very
nicely. The organization's layering is
as nice as the software
layering. Yeah, definitely. One of
the best compliments I've had
from a colleague Katrina said
to me, once that I
was her favorite person to
disagree with, which I felt
was awesome. And we had
a really good working relationship.
And when we disagreed with
each other, it was always
from a place of like,
Ooh, what do you know
that I don't like, what
are your experiences that have
formed that opinion? And usually
there was, you know, very
good thing that one of
us was just missing. Yeah.
That was pretty, That's a
really important thing to point
out also is that we
always talk about the myth
of the 10 X and
the super smart person that
is in a closet somewhere.
And we just push pizza
under the door and, you
know, they know all the
answers, but we all, we
are this just big Venn
diagram of people with different
experiences. And you might on
this problem, you might know
the thing. And on the
other one, your intuition might
know the thing, sharing that,
that knowledge freely, without judgment,
without any concern makes you
want to go to work
in the morning, as opposed
to the like, Oh, they're
going to know. I don't
know what I'm doing. I
don't have any. Yeah, absolutely.
You, you used the term
in your blog, strategic technical
leader, and you also have
this great phrase where you
said you love being parachuted
into a situation. You know,
when I think about the
parachuting person, I think about
two kinds. There's either the,
the general that comes in
another example would be like
Harvey Keitel and pulp fiction
where like they have a
huge problem. And then they
bring in the Wolf to
handle the problem. Or there's
like the technical person who
gets parachuted in like the
Tom cruise type who comes
in on a wire and
he's here to solve it
all. Cause he knows everything
you're coming in as a
technical leader, more of as
a coordinator, as opposed to
the key, the genius is
here and she will have
the answer. Is that right?
Yes, definitely. I do like
that sort of, I thrive
with that sort of responsibility
of like just Semyon and
you know, my boss or
whoever can just consider it
handled. And I kind of
get a buzz out of
the unknown of that and
being able to go in
and figure out like, what
even are we dealing with
here? You know, what are
the problems? And yeah, I
dunno, I'm a pretty driven
person. And I get a
buzz out of the project
nature of like kind of
work, I think rather than
doing the sort of the
same thing every week for
every, every week of the
year. There's a great TV
show called scandal. You might've
seen Olivia Pope gifts where she's
walking into her, in her,
a wonderful white raincoat and
she's on the phone like
it's handled. So your boss
calls you and says, this
is a huge problem over
in project a alright handled.
And then you have to
go and actually mean mean
it. Right. You can't just
say it. It has to
actually do it. Yeah, absolutely.
Yeah. I think what I've
been trying to communicate to
other folk recently that are
like, Oh, how would you
even approach this work is
like, I've had some exciting
successes that ship and projects,
but what people don't see
is like the Mike Dunn of
preparation that goes before that.
And definitely for me, if
I'm going to put my
name, you know, put my
hand up and say, I'll
handle this. Like I, I
want to be as prepared
as is humanly possible to
make that, make that a
successful project. Hey friends, I
want to thank one of
our sponsors. The company text
control. They're the creator of
TXT text control. It's a
Microsoft word, inspired document editor
library. It's basically a document
processing engine for your web
applications. They've got libraries for
asp.net, MVC for angular, for
no JS. And they just
released a dotnet core version.
It lets you basically integrate
a Wiziwig editor into your
web applications. You can edit
docs, you can do merge
templates. You can include data.
You can even create Adobe
PDF documents. It's a fully
featured API. It's really pretty
amazing. You can try it
free. And I encourage you
to check out the live
demos@textcontrol.com slash demos, text control.com/demos.
It's really pretty amazing piece
of work. Another thing that
you called you've called out
is the idea of the
cultural impact you can have.
And I think sometimes when
someone doesn't have direct reports
when they're not a manager,
when they don't feel senior,
but they are, they want
to be, they feel helpless
that they can't in fact
change the culture of their
organization. But for example, you've
improved technical interview processes and
you've also, you're able you
have a passion and healthy
code reviews. How can you
as a non-manager change the
way an organization does code
reviews and make things better
for people? Oh yeah, it's
a great question. But to
be honest, my experience has
been very different to that
assumption. Like I, I think
you have a lot more
freedom to make change culturally
in an organization maybe than
as a manager or that's
been my experience, you know,
maybe a little more free
of, I don't know that
the chain of command telling
you like this is the
message and this is just
what you have to do.
And maybe a little, it's
a little easier maybe to
challenge the status quo or
maybe you're not as much
as a threat to people.
You know, like if you're
Interesting. So if you're not
a manager you're less of
a threat, which allows you
to get more done because
you're sneaking around shipping Or
like, you know, if so
many different implications, if your
manager is telling people to
do something, you know, and
that person might have an
effect on your performance review
your ultimately your, your salary.
But if a very senior
engineer is promoting or advocating
a certain thing, it's, it's
just different. Those, those competitions
out there. So I find
it's been like, I dunno,
I've just had more space
to, to push back on
certain things or to advocate
for, for certain things. One
of the things you point
out is that this autonomy,
that that ability to move
around is earned by delivering,
right? And I think that's
a thing that for early
in career people to remember
that it's not necessarily just
shipping every quarter because not
everything ships neatly on a
quarter, but just someone asks
you to do something you
deliver, whether it's a big
task or a small task
that slowly builds up kind
of your, your reputation in
the org, your stock effectively
in the org as someone
who can get things done.
Yeah, absolutely. And I guess
one example that was pretty
terrifying at the time, but
of kind of a mixture
of that, like being able
to push back and having
the trust, there was a
time once when something really
senior in the engineering or
didn't like the direction of
a thing and, and said
should just uncheck this, like
literally ship an unshaved. Yeah.
Like literally send, send out
an email, tell the, the
beater user saying like, sorry,
we're like taking this back.
And, and I thought it
was a terrible idea. Like
I thought this was a
really good project and that
we should continue it. And
I remember that the product
manager was, had drafted. The
email was ready to send,
to tell the integrators the
next day to pull the
plug on this thing. And
I practically begged him and
said like, please don't send
this email, like give me
40 at ours. And I
will figure out a better
way we can do this.
And he agreed, I guess,
cause I had some credibility
in the area and said
like, okay, you know, you've
got, yeah, you've got 40
at ours. And then, and
then we're pulling the plug
and, and it worked like
I came up with a
different proposal and it turned
out to have been the
right decision, but that was
kind of terrifying. But just
having the, I don't know,
I was in a good
position to question like, this
is, this is actually really
bad decision tonight. I know
you have way more authority
than me, but I think
this is a bad move.
And please let me prove
why That is a movie
that I would want to
see. It's almost like the,
the, the, the archetype of
the, the, the, the bad
cop and the bad cop,
but like the, you know,
the cop that's always getting
in trouble that goes into
the, the sergeant's office. And
they're like, you know, I'm
tired of justifying your craziness
with the commissioner and you're
like, I need 48 hours.
So I just am imagining
you like leaning forward with
your fist on the desk.
I need 48 hours just
get, okay, you've got 36
hours and then you go
off and parachute in and
keep the thing from being
unshipped. Right. Yeah. Amazing. But
this is really important. You
can't just go in there
as someone that hasn't ever
done, anything successful. You, you
have to earn that, that
stock, that reputation, those, those
points. And in this case,
you earned them over a
period of shipping and then
you spent them, but in
the process of spending them
earned even more because you,
in fact succeeded Yeah. On
that occasion, like I was
right to question and, and,
and the outcome was w
was better offer for everybody.
And I've definitely also lost
those conversations. You know, I've
had similar scenarios where I've
said, like being the annoyance
voice. And like, I, I
think this is the wrong
decision and here here's why,
and, and sort of it
not gone the way I
wanted, but I think that's
also a really good role
that you can play as
a very senior IC is
to be the extra voice
question and things, and, and
sort of helping the discussion
when there, cause there's always
trade offs obviously. Right. And
flavor, always some conflict of,
I don't know whether it's
a short term versus long
term conflict, or if it
meets the business needs rather
the wider ecosystem or whatever
the conflict is like, those
are, those are good meaty
conversations for a senior IC
to get involved in. Another
thing that you talk about
a lot on your blog
is this idea of a
strike team. What is a
strike team and how do
you spin them up and
then ramp them up and
then spin them down. Yeah,
for me, what has worked
is this has come up
by when maybe I've been
working solo on like doing
some research and like kind
of like trying to figure
out what, what we could
do next and come up
with maybe a prototype or
a proposal on here's the
direction and the should go.
This is what I did
with that. Check's API that
you mentioned and had enough
together and convinced enough people
of like, yeah, this is,
this is a really good
idea. We should do this,
but then needed a team
to make that happen. So
that was one occasion where
I recruited people to form
that team. That would be
a fairly short term thing.
And eventually the project would
be owned by a wider
group, but that's where I've
used a strike team. Like
maybe a project that will
last, maybe we'll work on
it together for six months
or nine months. And then
it will be consumed by
the wider, by the wider
group. Do you borrow, are
you borrowing them full time?
How do you manage the
staffing of that? How do
you convince their bosses to
loan them to you? Or
is this volunteer work that
they're doing in their copious
spare time Mixture of like
getting the, what? Well, what
I have done is a
mixture of getting the individual
on board first and then
are making sure that they'd
be interested in and onboard
and then go into the
manager and just present the
case of like, why this
would be really valuable for
the company, for the team.
And also that, you know,
I really need that person
specifically. And usually that's, I've
had a mixture of like
either half and people maybe
not completely full time. Maybe
that's a negotiated thing of
like, can I have this
person for X days a
week? And they can still
do whatever general team responsibilities
that, that you know, that
they have, but that that's,
that's worked out really well
for me. What is some
advice that you would give
someone in the sense of
you've been a senior IC
in various orgs, but now
you actually, you actually have
some positional privilege in that
someone you could email someone
who doesn't know you in
the org and then they
would go, Oh, office of
the CTO, and now you
suddenly got a label behind
you to back you up.
You've built the reputation up.
So that's why you're there
now. But how can I
show senior IC who doesn't
necessarily have a label like
that get included? Is it
just through clarity of their
communication style and their, their
own reputation? Like it's such
a dip, it's a thing
that is dependent on reputation
as you are building that
up and you don't have,
you know, you don't, you're
not 20 years in, maybe
you're seven years into your
career. How do you get
included in those conversations? Yeah,
it's so hard. And to
be honest, even like, I've
struggled with that a times,
even when I, you know,
in theory had built up
the credibility and, you know,
she should have been included
or respected or whatever. I
think some of the things
that can work well is
either having an explicit sponsor,
like someone really in a
high position in the, to,
to, to advocate for you,
whether you're present or not,
or having some peers that
will back you up in
a, in a group call
That sponsorship idea. I was
talking with David Fowler. David Fowler is
one of the architects of.net
and asp.net. And he's a,
by the way, he told
me to tell you he's
a big fan of your
blog. And he really likes
the differentiation between the word
mentor and sponsor, you know,
mentors give you advice, but
sponsors will sneak you into
meetings basically. And let you
sit in the back and
then you just wait for
your moment to pounce, say
something smart. And then suddenly
you moved from sitting on
the back wall or leaning
against the back wall to
sitting at the table. Right?
Yeah. And funny, I had
a position once, like a
informal position where I was
really acting as the technical
representative for my department, but
until we put a name
to that, there was always
difficulty in, I guess, people
taking me seriously and, and
big group calls. And so
I, I went to like
my, my boss at the
time who was, you know,
had more seniority or, you
know, had a good title
and said like, can cheat.
This will just make things
easier for everyone. Could you
just tell them officially that
I, you know, acting as
the technical representative and once
he did that, it made
life so much easier. Was
that hard to do that?
I mean, cause you're basically
like, I'll be honest. I've
done that as well. I've
I've, I've asked someone it's,
isn't it funny? We're here
talking with two grown people
saying, you know, you could
just say what you want
and maybe they'll give it
to you. It still feels
like, you know, tall grade
school where it's like, I
really want to go on
the field trip. I said,
I'd like to be in
that meeting. I think I
would have a lot of
value if you'd let me
join you all. And they'll
either say yes or no.
And the problem is you
have to prep for the
know and be ready for
the yes. Yeah. Well, hi.
I find it easier to
like, I don't know, deal
with in my own head
is that I'm not asking
for a fee ever, you
know, like the company has
already asked me to perform
this role and it would
just make it easier if
everybody else understood that context
as well. So Yeah. Isn't
that the thing though, con
it's all about context, you
know, this is why at
the beginning, when you said
Katrina, how she said that
you were the favorite person
to disagree with, because it's
like, well, what do you
know? What do you know?
You know, what do you
know? It's all about? It's
not about, who's the smartest
it's about who has the
context that we're missing. And
then if we all get
the context, then we'll be
able to pull this thing
off. And that ultimately is
what the technical icy is
supposed to do is build
consensus and energy. Yeah, absolutely.
So you use this power,
you've got this independence, you
don't have an, a team
as much, you're able to
go and then support and
influence other things. Are you
kind of applying pressure on
different orgs and different folks
to move the strategic direction
forward? Yes, very, very much
like my current role is
I'm leading the strategy for
the API at Fastly. And
that involves like talking to
a whole bunch of different
teams and figuring lately, you
know, what, what they need
and how to move things
forward. You mentioned a minute
ago who like haven't asked
explicitly, or it seems so
simple to say, like, here's
what I want. And I
find the opposite is true.
Like talking to other teams
of like, just asking people
like, what do you actually
need? Like, what are you,
what are you that's, that's
been really helpful. And that's,
that gets to your point
about, you're not just an
engineer talking to other engineers,
right? There's technical writers, product
managers, interface, designers, salespeople, lawyers,
you have a whole list
here, execs, competitors, peers, users.
It's usually, you know, who
talks to all of those
people who coordinates all of
those people, a senior icy,
a senior, you know, independent
can go and do that
when maybe someone else doing
it wouldn't land the same.
Yeah, absolutely. I take a
very collaborative approach to that.
I, a mixture of just
what I think works and
my personality, like I'm not
gonna kind of come in
and try and boss anybody
around. So I definitely am
always trying to like, just,
just get, get, buy in
and get people on board,
you know, and a lot
of that's three smaller conversations
and, and, and building that
up. So I've realized that
as someone who is complaining
about acronyms, I don't remember
if we ever actually told
people that I see as
an individual contributor and that'll
be my bed. Cause it's,
it's, you know, independent contributor,
individual contributor, one who doesn't
have a full team. Like,
you know, you don't know
your, you don't have people
who work for you directly
from an HR perspective. You're
not signing checks. You're not
promoting people. You're, you're an
individual or an independent contributor
in a strategic technical leadership
role. And like you said,
it's a hard path. You
kind of have to ask
for it. Don't you have
to cultivate that path. Yeah,
definitely. I think for, for
me, what has worked is
just really just realizing the
parts of that work that
I really enjoy and the
parts that I don't like
so much and just being
persistent and, and, and trying
to create and do well.
And there's opportunities that kind
of align me to keep
doing that. And, Well, cool.
Well, thank you so much
for chatting with me today.
Yeah. Thank you so much
for having me. We've been
talking with Kevi McMahon. You
can check out her blog@covid.com
that's  V Y she's
got lots of great information
about how you can thrive
as an individual contributor and
build bridges as a technical
leader. This has been another
episode of Hanselminutes and we'll
see you again next week.
.